.\"                                      Hey, EMACS: -*- nroff -*-
.\" First parameter, NAME, should be all caps
.\" Second parameter, SECTION, should be 1-8, maybe w/ subsection
.\" other parameters are allowed: see man(7), man(1)
.TH PTDUMP 1 "July 7, 2007"
.\" Please adjust this date whenever revising the manpage.
.\"
.\" Some roff macros, for reference:
.\" .nh        disable hyphenation
.\" .hy        enable hyphenation
.\" .ad l      left justify
.\" .ad b      justify to both left and right margins
.\" .nf        disable filling
.\" .fi        enable filling
.\" .br        insert line break
.\" .sp <n>    insert n+1 empty lines
.\" for manpage-specific macros, see man(7)
.SH NAME
ptdump \- Lets you dig into the contents of a \fIPyTables\fR file.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B ptdump
.RB [\| \-dvacih \|]
.RB [\| \-R \| \  start,stop,step]
.RB file[:nodepath]
.br
.SH DESCRIPTION
Allows you look into the contents of your \fIPyTables\fR files. It lets
you see not only the data but also the metadata (that is, the structure
and additional information in the form of attributes).

.SH OPTIONS
A summary of options is included below.
.TP
.B \-d
Dump data information on leaves.
.TP
.B \-v
Dump more metainformation on nodes.
.TP
.B \-a
Show attributes in nodes (only useful when \-v or \-d are active).
.TP
.B \-c
Show info of columns in tables (only useful when \-v or \-d are active).
.TP
.B \-i
Show info of indexed column (only useful when \-v or \-d are active).
.TP
.BI \-R\  start,stop,step
Select a range of rows in the form "start,stop,step" for \fIall\fR leaves.
.TP
.B \-h
Print help on usage.

.br

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR ptrepack (1).
.br
These utilities are documented fully by
.IR "PyTables user's manual".
.SH AUTHOR
This manual page was written by Francesc Altet <faltet@carabos.com>.
