.\"                                      Hey, EMACS: -*- nroff -*-
.\" First parameter, NAME, should be all caps
.\" Second parameter, SECTION, should be 1-8, maybe w/ subsection
.\" other parameters are allowed: see man(7), man(1)
.TH PTREPACK 1 "July 7, 2007"
.\" Please adjust this date whenever revising the manpage.
.\"
.\" Some roff macros, for reference:
.\" .nh        disable hyphenation
.\" .hy        enable hyphenation
.\" .ad l      left justify
.\" .ad b      justify to both left and right margins
.\" .nf        disable filling
.\" .fi        enable filling
.\" .br        insert line break
.\" .sp <n>    insert n+1 empty lines
.\" for manpage-specific macros, see man(7)
.SH NAME
ptrepack \- Copy any PyTables Leaf, Group or complete subtree into another file.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B ptrepack
.RB \-h
.RB \-v
.RB \-o
.RB \-R
.IR start,stop,step
.RB \-\-non\-recursive
.RB \-\-dest-title=title
.RB \-\-dont\-copyuser\-attrs
.RB \-\-overwrite\-nodes
.RB \-\-complevel=(0\-9)
.RB \-\-complib=lib
.RB \-\-shuffle=(0|1)
.RB \-\-fletcher32=(0|1)
.RB \-\-keep\-source\-filters
.RB \-\-upgrade\-flavors
.RB \-\-dont\-regenerate\-old\-indexes
.RB sourcefile:sourcegroup
.RB destfile:destgroup
.br
.SH DESCRIPTION
Copy any Leaf, Group or complete subtree from a PyTables file into another file.
.SH OPTIONS
A summary of options is included below.
.TP
.B \-h
Prints a help text.
.TP
.B \-v
Show more information.
.TP
.B \-o
Overwrite destination file.
.TP
.BI \-R\ RANGE
Select a RANGE of rows in the form \fIstart,stop,step\fR during the copy of
\fIall\fR the leaves.
.TP
.BI \-\-non\-recursive
Do not do a recursive copy. Default is to do it.
.TP
.BI \-\-dest\-title=title
Title for the new file (if not specified, the source is copied).
.TP
.BI \-\-dont\-copy\-userattrs
Do not copy the user attrs (default is to do it).
.TP
.BI \-\-overwrite\-nodes
Overwrite destination nodes if they exist. Default is not to overwrite
them.
.TP
.BI \-\-complevel=(0-9)
Set a compression level (0 for no compression, which is the default).
.TP
.BI \-\-complib=lib
Set the compression library to be used during the copy. \fIlib\fR can
be set to "zlib", "lzo", "ucl" or "bzip2". Defaults to "zlib".
.TP
.BI \-\-shuffle=(0|1)
Activate or not the shuffling filter (default is active if complevel>0).
.TP
.BI \-\-fletcher32=(0|1)
Whether to activate or not the fletcher32 filter (not active by default).
.TP
.BI  \-\-keep\-source\-filters
Use the original filters in source files. The default is not doing that
if any of \-\-complevel, \-\-complib, \-\-shuffle or \-\-fletcher32
option is specified.
.TP
.BI  \-\-upgrade\-flavors
When repacking PyTables 1.x files, the flavor of leaves will be
unset. With this, such a leaves will be serialized as objects with the
internal flavor ("numpy" for 2.x series).
.TP
.BI  \-\-dont\-regenerate\-old\-indexes
Disable regenerating old indexes. The default is to regenerate old
indexes as they are found.

.br

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR ptdump (1).
.br
These utilities are documented fully by
.IR "PyTables user's manual".
.SH AUTHOR
This manual page was written by Francesc Altet <faltet@carabos.com>.
