.\"                                      Hey, EMACS: -*- nroff -*-
.\" First parameter, NAME, should be all caps
.\" Second parameter, SECTION, should be 1-8, maybe w/ subsection
.\" other parameters are allowed: see man(7), man(1)
.TH pttree 1 "May 15, 2013"
.\" Please adjust this date whenever revising the manpage.
.\"
.\" Some roff macros, for reference:
.\" .nh        disable hyphenation
.\" .hy        enable hyphenation
.\" .ad l      left justify
.\" .ad b      justify to both left and right margins
.\" .nf        disable filling
.\" .fi        enable filling
.\" .br        insert line break
.\" .sp <n>    insert n+1 empty lines
.\" for manpage-specific macros, see man(7)
.SH NAME
pttree \- prints a quick overview of the contents of PyTables HDF5 files.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B pttree
[ OPTIONS ]
.RB filename[:nodepath]
.br
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B pttree
is designed to give a quick overview of the contents of a PyTables
HDF5 file by printing a depth-indented list of nodes, similar to the output of
the Unix `tree` function. It can also display the size, shape and compression
states of individual nodes, as well as summary information for the whole file.
For a more verbose output (including metadata), see `ptdump`.

.SH OPTIONS
A summary of options is included below.
.TP
.B \-L MAX_DEPTH, \--max-level MAX_DEPTH
maximum branch depth of tree to display (-1 == no limit)
.TP
.B \-S SORT_BY, \--sort-by SORT_BY
artificially order nodes, can be either "size", "name" or "none"
.TP
.B \--print-size
print size of each node/branch
.TP
.B \--no-print-size
.TP
.B \--print-shape
print shape of each node
.TP
.B \--no-print-shape
.TP
.B \--print-compression
print compression library(level) for each compressed node
.TP
.B \--no-print-compression
.TP
.B \--print-percent
print size of each node as a % of the total tree size on disk
.TP
.B \--no-print-percent
.TP
.B \--use-si-units
report sizes in SI units (1 MB == 10^6 B)
.TP
.B \--use-binary-units
report sizes in binary units (1 MiB == 2^20 B)
.TP
.B \-h
Print help on usage.

.br

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR ptdump (1).
.br
These utilities are documented fully by
.IR "PyTables user's manual".
.SH AUTHOR
This manual page was written by Antonio Valentino <antonio.valentino@tiscali.it>.
